---
title: Cut & Thrust (C&T) Frequently Asked Questions
layout: default
---

### Rules References

What documents do I need to review prior to starting C&T training?

You should fully review both the [Society](http://www.sca.org/officers/marshal/combat/rapier/) and [Kingdom](http://atlantia.sca.org/134-offices/seneschal/policies-and-laws/atlantian-book-of-policy/marshal-pages/116-3-11-section-xi-rapier-combat) rapier rules.

I am already familiar with the Atlantian Rapier rules, which ones
changed?

While reviewing the ruleset as a whole is recommended, please make sure you review sections 3.11.2, 3.11.3.1.2, 3.11.3.2.1, and 3.11.3.2.3

### Implementation Details

#### I want to become authorized, what is required?

In order to attempt to authorize, the candidate must have been
authorized in either Rapier or Armored combat for at least one year.

During this year, the candidate must have actively been participating in
practice and competition using the authorized form. This is so the
candidate gains experience in the forms, practices, and techniques of
SCA combat. Training, practices, and pick-up bouting with the cut and
thrust form, while recommended prior to taking an authorization test, is
not sufficient to meet this requirement.

#### What is the authorization process?

The authorization process is similar to that of traditional rapier.
There will be both a rules quiz and a series of authorization passes.

#### What is the authorization process checking for?

In addition to the standard safety checks of a traditional rapier
authorization, the C&T authorization ensures that candidates can
consistently throw full-speed C&T blows safely. Please expect a
challenging and thorough authorization.

#### I want to become a C&T marshal, what is required?
All C&T authorized combatants that hold an active rapier marshal warrant in Atlantia are C&T marshals.

#### When can we practice C&T?

You can only practice when a C&T marshal is present to oversee the
practice. No C&T is permitted to occur at any SCA event or practice
without a C&T marshal present and actively observing the combat.

#### When can we fight C&T at events?

C&T may occur at any event with authorized C&T fighters and a C&T
marshal subject to the permission of the marshals in charge.

#### What are the reporting requirements for C&T?

RMICs are required to specify in the event report when C&T occurs at the
event. The name of the presiding C&T marshal must be provided in the
report, along with a brief description of the activities.

### Important Differences

#### What are some of the important differences between armored fighting and C&T?

The most important difference is the lack of power generation. A number
of concepts and techniques will translate from armored to C&T, but those
parts of the technique that provide the force to the blow must be
reduced to fall inline with the calibration requirements. From a rules
perspective, the largest change is that C&T is based upon the
traditional rapier ruleset. While the introduction of percussive cuts
can dramatically alter the overall fight, the rules governing the fight
remain very similar to rapier. It is important that the armored fighter
become familiar with both the rules and the expected calibration level
during their training.

#### What are some of the important differences between rapier fighting and C&T?

The most obvious difference is the expected level of impact in C&T is
broader than that of traditional rapier. While the thrusts and draw cuts
should be of the same calibration as rapier fighting, the percussive cut
lands at a somewhat higher level, and fighters should be aware of that.
This does not excuse the fighter delivering the blow from exercising the
required control, but all participants must acknowledge that they will
be struck with a harder blow than they would normally receive in
traditional rapier. This also brings up another difference between C&T
and rapier. Traditionally in rapier fighting, armor has remained at the
minimum level. Many participants in C&T have chosen to wear armor above
the minimum requirements. This is entirely acceptable, and fighters
should wear whatever makes them comfortable. However, the fighter must
take the time to learn to call blows in the additional armor.

### C&T Training

#### What are some of the problems that occur during training?

There are a few areas that seem to be a common experience among C&T
fighters as they train. One, which seems to affect rapier fighters in
particular, is that the fight seems compressed in relation to regular
rapier fights. As fighters concentrate on the cut, they move closer than
they realize to their opponents. When their reflexes call for a thrust,
it often comes in very heavy because of the compressed range. Fighters
should begin slowly in order to avoid this.

Another common problem is the clearing shot. This comes up often in
armored fighting and in rapier fighters who are looking to break
engagement. A defensive shot thrown through the area between the
fighters is intended to clear the avenue of attack as the fighter
increases the range. This must be executed with caution, in part because
of the compressed range problem (for rapier fighters) and also because
even this shot must be made with control, in case it contacts the
opponent (for armored fighters).

Please let [DEM-Rapier](mailto:rapier%20AT%20atlantia.sca.org) know if
you see anything you think should be modified.

#### How should I start?

Obviously, you have to find a C&T marshal to practice with, but marshals
have put forth a number of additional recommendations as you start. An
often cited recommendation is to start with a lighter blade. Avoid
immediately starting with a heavy C&T only blade if you can. Instead
start with a lighter blade, perhaps even a 30 as you learn the ins, outs
and techniques that are specific to C&T.

### Reporting and Additional Questions

#### What are the reporting requirements for C&T?

For events, the RMIC must report any time C&T occurs at the event.
Please include the name of the C&T marshal that oversaw the fighting and
a brief overview of the activities that include C&T.

#### Where can I go for additional information?

If the rules dont answer your questions, there are a number of places
you can go. Any C&T marshal can field your question, you can ask on any
of the online lists (such as the Atlantian rapiernet or the Atlantian
marshals list) or you can email ask either the Deputy Earl Marshal for
Rapier Combat or one of his deputies.
